Blog: LLM Stack - added keywords for SEO (#2612)
Helicone/helicone: bifrost/app/blog/blogs/llm-stack-guide/src.mdx

As seasoned developers, we've witnessed the ebb and flow of numerous tech stacks. From the meteoric rise of **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>MERN</span>** to the gradual decline of **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>AngularJS</span>**, and the innovative emergence of Jamstack, tech stacks have been the backbone of web development evolution.

![LLM stack guide](/static/blog/llm-stack-guide/cover.webp)

In this blog, we will walk through the modern **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>LLM Stack</span>** - an emerging tech stack that is changing how developers build and scale Large Language Model (LLM) applications.

Before you continue, please first read the companion blog on [The Evolution of LLM Architecture](/blog/building-an-llm-stack). 

> ## The Evolution of LLM Applications

Reviewer: remove this section

2023 marked the rise of LLMs and their applications, with **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)</span>** emerging as the most popular use case. RAG involves using data retrieved from vector databases as context for LLMs to generate human-readable responses.

As we progress through 2024, we're witnessing advancements in implementation strategies. Key trends include:

- Increased focus on production-ready LLM applications
- Growing emphasis on observability and data versioning

> - Introduction of enterprise features to foundational components

Reviewer: What does this mean?

## Why a New Stack for LLM Applications?

> LLM applications, powered by pre-trained models, are deceptively simple to kickstart, but scaling them unveils unique challenges in machine learning and data processing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LLM applications, powered by pre-trained models, are deceptively simple to kickstart, but scaling them unveils unique challenges:
```
"machine learning and data processing" doesn't make too much sense.

> 1. **Platform Limitations**: Traditional stacks struggle with LLM app demands, especially when dealing with real-time data pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Platform Limitations**: Traditional stacks struggle with the unique demands of LLM apps.
```

Doesn't make much sense as is

> 2. **Tooling Gaps**: Existing tools often fall short in managing LLM-specific workflows, including **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>prompt engineering</span>** and efficient API calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Tooling Gaps**: Existing tools often fall short in managing LLM-specific workflows, including **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>prompt engineering</span>** and evaluations.
```

> 3. **Observability Hurdles**: Monitoring LLM performance requires specialized solutions for tracking **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>embedding models</span>** and external API usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Observability Hurdles**: Monitoring LLM performance requires specialized solutions for tracking **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>agentic workflows</span>**, multi-modal models, and more
```

> 4. **Security Concerns**: LLMs introduce new vectors for data breaches and **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>prompt injections</span>**, necessitating robust data processing protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Security Concerns**: LLMs introduce new vectors for data breaches and **<span style={{color: '#0ea5e9'}}>prompt injections</span>**.
```

honestly doesn't make much sense

| :-------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Datastores      | [Helicone API](https://docs.helicone.ai/rest/request/post-v1requestquery), LangFuse, LangSmith                                  |
| Experimentation | [Helicone Experiments](https://docs.helicone.ai/use-cases/experiments#how-to-run-llm-prompt-experiments), Promptfoo, Braintrust |
| Evaluators      | PromptFoo, Lastmile, BaseRun                                                                                                    |
| Fine Tuning     | OpenPipe, Autonomi                                                                                                              |

## Where Helicone Fit Into Your LLM Stack

Helicone isn't just another tool in the LLM stack - it's a game-changer for building AI applications. Our primary focus areas, Gateway and Observability, are crucial for building robust, scalable LLM applications. We offer:

1. **Efficient LLM Cache**: Optimize your API calls and reduce costs.

> 2. **Real-Time Monitoring**: Track your embedding models and external API usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Real-Time Monitoring**: Track your LLM requests & responses + metadata
```

> 3. **Orchestration Framework**: Streamline your data processing and machine learning workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Orchestration Framework**: Streamline your data processing.
```

![Helicone in the emerging LLM Stack](/static/blog/llm-stack-guide/production.webp)

## The Future of LLM Applications

As we look ahead, several trends are shaping the future of LLM applications:

- Increased focus on specialized, domain-specific models
- Enhanced privacy and security measures for LLM deployments
- Improved integration between LLMs and traditional software stacks
- Advancements in multimodal AI capabilities

> The LLM Stack is revolutionizing AI application development, enabling more robust and scalable solutions. As LLM architectures evolve, the focus is on creating cost-effective, powerful AI systems that expand the frontiers of machine learning and artificial intelligence. This new paradigm empowers developers to meet the growing demands of our AI-driven world with increased efficiency and innovation.

Reviewer: I'd just remove "The Future of LLM Applications" section because doesn't really have any good substance
